# Beginner PVE Equipment

- ##### Basic Concepts
- ##### Shops Guide
- ##### Equipment List

## Basic Concepts
##### Very Important, Please Read:
While an understanding of these concepts is not truly necessary to play or enjoy the game, they are important if you wish to understand why certain guns are superior to others, especially when a more surface-level examination would not imply such. If you wish to skip this section, at least read the portion that covers tech level. More than anything else, an understanding of tech level will aid you in making informed decisions about what equipment is worth using.

### Tech Level
Perhaps one of the least obvious concepts for a newer player, tech level is also one of the most important when it comes to choosing what equipment to use. Tech level can be viewed in the upper right corner of an equipment's stat card. For most equipment in the game, tech level ranges from T1 to T3, with a higher tech level version of a piece of equipment being stronger in every aspect and one rarity higher. Tech level 0 also exists and is functionally identical to tech 3, except that tech 0 equipment is unique and has no lower-rarity variant.

Assuming all pieces of equipment are at the same upgrade level, tech 3 equipment of *all rarities* is comparable. This means that early game, tech 3 blue equipment will often be as strong as purple or gold equipment, while being easier to obtain and cheaper to upgrade. Blue equipment will fall off later in the game because it caps at an upgrade level of +6, while purple and gold equipment can be upgraded to +10.

Because of the tech level system, purple rarity equipment has the potential to be superior to gold equipment, which is something that happens in many cases. Similarly, with the relative ease of acquisition and upgrading of purple equipment, it's far more efficient for a newer player to focus on strong, but lower rarity equipment, rather than tunnel vision on acquiring shiny gold rarity equipment.

### Damage Calculations
Understanding the way damage is calculated is vital to understanding why certain pieces of equipment are stronger than others. While the full damage formula (available on the wiki) can seem daunting, a basic version of the damage formula that tells you most of what you need to know would be: <br/>
```base damage × armour modifier × stat modifier × slot efficiency```

- **Base Damage:** this is the base damage of the weapon, available on the equipment's stat card. The only exceptions are fighters and dive bombers, whose displayed damage stats are not indicative of the actual damage dealt by that piece of equipment.
- **Armour Modifier:** every type of ammo for every type of weapon has a unique set of damage multipliers for each type of armour in the game. Boss fights mandate specialisation; know your enemy's armour class and equip your ships accordingly. Armour mods for every type of weapon can be found on the wiki.
- **Stat Modifier:** one of two stats in the basic damage formula that's tied to the equipped ship rather than the weapon. A ship's corresponding damage stat translates into a +% damage at a 1:1 level. A ship's stat modifier can be found with <br/>
```1 + (stat / 100)``` <br/>
In other words, there's a base damage multiplier of 1.00x, and a firepower stat of 100 would be +100% or +1.00 to that for a stat modifier of 2.00x; a firepower stat of 500 would be a 6.00x stat mod, et cetera. Stat bonuses from equipment or skills should be added before translating the stat into the stat mod.
- **Slot Efficiency:** the other ship statistic. Efficiency for a given equipment slot can be viewed on the ship's equipment screen or the wiki. It's a very straightforward damage multiplier; an efficiency of 135% translates directly into a 1.35x damage modifier.
- **Level Advantage:** while left out of the earlier basic damage formula, ships deal increased damage and take reduced damage based on the level difference between them and their targets, stacking 2% per level up to a maximum bonus of 50% with a 25 level difference. Level advantage allows a newer player to brute-force earlier maps despite having mediocre or unupgraded equipment, just by having a significantly higher level than the enemies on the map. However, the high-level of later maps makes this less viable.
- **Danger Level:** by killing the boss of a given map, you can build up a stacking buff that increases your damage dealt and decreases your damage taken. Danger level stacks additively with level advantage and shares the same 50% cap. This is the primary mechanic through which high-level maps are made easier for faster and more efficient grinding.

Base damage is the single-most important attribute of a given weapon and as such, upgrading your equipment is the most effective way to increase the performance of your ships. Low or no equipment upgrades are the leading cause of newer players running into a wall when progressing through maps.

### Ballistics
An often overlooked aspect of equipment performance, ballistics refers to the physical characteristics of a weapon in combat. While mathematics can provide a basis for comparison, it cannot account for certain ballistic characteristics. As such, it's important to back up maths with empirical evidence and vice versa. A short list of important ballistic characteristics would include:
- **Ammo Type:** aside from affecting damage in a more direct way, different shell types also have different velocities. High-explosive shells have the lowest velocity while armour-piercing shells have the highest velocity. This impacts the range of a gun, which is especially noticeable with low-caliber destroyer guns. A given HE gun might have a much higher listed range than a comparable normal or AP gun, but the effective range of the shells are identical because the low velocity of the HE shells reduces the amount of distance the shell can travel. Shell velocity is also why AP shells tend to have an advantage at interception when equipped as an aux gun on main fleet ships. In addition to impacting armour mods and shell velocity, AP shells can penetrate their initial target and potentially hit a second target.
- **Range:** mentioned briefly under ammo types, the displayed range stat of a given gun is its targeting range. Higher caliber gun types also receive a small, innate bonus to their range, beyond what the range stat would imply. A gun will only fire when it detects a target within this range. However, each gun also has a hidden 'true range' which is the amount of time a shell will stay on screen. The implications of this, as stated under ammo types, is that HE guns tend to have shorter effective ranges when compared to the other shell types. The increased targeting range of HE guns paired with the short effective range means HE guns will tend to have a substantial deadzone where the gun will fire, but the physical shell will reach its maximum range and fizzle out without hitting anything. This is most obvious and impactful with lower-caliber guns, but can sometimes be seen with higher-caliber guns as well.
- **Spread:** perhaps the most obvious stat that impacts practical performance, also sometimes referred to as dispersion or deviation. The spread of a gun is the angle at which shells can be launched. The longer the distance from the target, the more impactful spread will be on a gun's performance. There are also two different fundamental types of firing patterns, which alter the way spread affects a given gun: fixed pattern guns, whose shells will always occupy the same relative spots within the firing cone, meaning the shells will always be as spread out as the displayed spread stat of the gun; random pattern guns, whose first salvo is going to be zeroed into the target, but whose followup shells will randomly deviate from the zero within the spread of the gun.
- **Targeting Angle:** similar to range, a ship will only fire its gun when that gun detects a target within its targeting angle. For the most part, angle is consistent for all guns within a given caliber, though some exceptions exist. Because of this, angle is not a terribly important statistic, but its existence impacts certain things, namely scattershot guns (see below) and vanguard barrages. All vanguard barrages fire directly forward, however, destroyer guns are capable of firing behind the ship, while light cruiser guns fire in a wide cone that includes enemies mostly to the side of the firing ship. The increased firing angles of these low caliber guns can often lead to a vanguard unit triggering her barrage without a target in front of her to actually hit.
- **Targeting Attribute:** there are three types of targeting attributes: lock-on, bracketing, and scattershot. Most vanguard caliber guns have lock-on targeting. This means that the targeting vector will always be zeroed in on the target. Bracketing guns are guns that launch arcing shells and include every battleship gun and a handful of especially high-caliber vanguard guns. Bracketing guns can bypass shields, have targeting vectors fixed on a certain point with a radial spread, and can create small aoe explosions. Because their targeting vectors are fixed on a point, if they miss their intended target, they will splash harmlessly into the water, while a lock-on gun's linear shells can continue traveling and potentially hit another target within their effective range. Scattershot guns shoot linear shells, like lock-on guns, but lack targeting vectors entirely. This means they will always zero in on 0° on the horizontal axis, which is to say, they will fire directly in front of the ship regardless of whether there's a target there or not. Scattershot guns only exist in light cruiser calibers, and despite not aiming their shells at an actual target, they share the same wide targeting angle as other CL guns, meaning your gun can acquire a target to the side of your ship, fire, and hit absolutely nothing. Scattershot guns should be avoided even if their statline would imply that they're a higher damage option than whatever alternatives you have available.
- **Targeting Vectors:** once a target is acuired within a given gun's targeting range and angle relative to the equipped ship, the gun fires along a targeting vector. Targeting vectors are fixed once the gun begins firing. This means, for guns that shoot multiple salvoes per reload cycle, the followup salvoes will always be aimed at the same spot as the initial salvo, regardless of if the intended target dies or moves.

## Shops
#### WIP

## Equipment List & Early-Game Farming Locations
